---
title: My Manifesto
layout: post
date: 2014-09-24 1:18 AM
published: false
---

*"Your product shouldn't be limited by the technologies you use."*

## The End User Comes First

When making decisions over the architectures and technologies you use, always
take into consideration how those will impact the end user. You prioritize the
user's experience over that of the developer. That sacrifice, and how you
compensate its implications, is what makes you the kind of developer you are.

## Only Use What You Need

As part of your philosophy, you stand against the mainstream use of large,
monolithic frameworks and you instead stand in favor of the modular application
architecture.  This architecture gives you freedom in choosing what
technologies you need. By design, your stack can now scale and compose with
other technologies or architectures.

## Correctness over Ease of Use

Rather than use technologies that are designed for the experience of the
developer, you use libraries and frameworks that let you focus on writing
correct, performant and scalable software. You write out every loop by hand.
You focus on structuring your code for maintainability from the start. You
adhere to a strict code-style that enforces readability and verbosity to
accommodate for the lack of 'shorthand' you can write.

## Seperate Your Concerns

You do not depend on a single architecture or framework to decide how you
separate your concerns. You make decisions on the needs of your product, not
the needs of your technologies. You can choose how to structure your
application because you use a modular architecture.  You trust yourself and the
developers in your team to make these decisions on a smaller scale.

## Be Aware of Production

You are not a careless developer who does not worry about managing their
production systems. You understand and control your production process. You
make optimizations for your production environments. You structure your code to
improve functionality in production. You know how to scale your production
systems.
